                           BILL ANALYSIS                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ó




           ----------------------------------------------------------------- 
          |SENATE RULES COMMITTEE            |                        ACR 46|
          |Office of Senate Floor Analyses   |                              |
          |(916) 651-1520    Fax: (916)      |                              |
          |327-4478                          |                              |
           ----------------------------------------------------------------- 


                                    THIRD READING


          Bill No:  ACR 46
          Author:   Calderon (D), et al.
          Amended:  4/20/15 in Assembly
          Vote:     21  

          SENATE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE: Senate Rule 28.8

          ASSEMBLY FLOOR:  Read and adopted, 4/20/15

           SUBJECT:   Arts Council:  funding


          SOURCE:    Author


          DIGEST:  This resolution declares the importance of the arts to  
          the state and the essential role of the Arts Council in  
          promoting the arts throughout the state, and urges a unified  
          effort between the Legislature and the Governor to provide a  
          substantial increase in the General Fund appropriation to the  
          California Arts Council (CAC).  




          ANALYSIS:  This resolution makes the following legislative  
          findings:


          1)Since the 1970s, the Arts Council, also known as the CAC, has  
            served the state by strategically promoting increased access  
            to the arts for all Californians, particularly for residents  
            living in communities that lack sufficient and convenient  
            opportunities to experience the benefits of the arts in their  
            lives.








                                                                     ACR 46  
                                                                     Page  2





          2)In the past, the state appropriated funds that could  
            meaningfully support the programs of the CAC.  However,  
            beginning in 2003, the annual funding of the CAC from the  
            General Fund drastically dropped, and since that time, the  
            funding has remained essentially flat at a $1 million annual  
            appropriation, making California one of the lowest ranked  
            states to invest in the arts on a per capita basis.  The  
            programs of the CAC that once reached rural towns, underserved  
            urban neighborhoods, prisons, and schools have either been  
            depleted or discontinued entirely.


          3)The arts invigorate the state and national economies.  The  
            creative sector has become one of the state's most important  
            drivers of economic growth.  The 2013 Otis Report on the  
            Creative Economy, analyzing the economic impact of the  
            creative economy in the state, concluded that 9.7% of jobs in  
            the state are connected, directly or indirectly, to the  
            creative industries.  A recent report by the United States  
            Bureau of Economic Analysis concluded that the arts and  
            culture sector represent 3.2% of the nation's gross domestic  
            product in 2011.


          4)The arts bolster small and large businesses and the nonprofit  
            sector.  Local merchants directly benefit when people attend  
            art events in their community because attendees make purchases  
            related to the event, including, among other things, meals and  
            parking.  Nationally, in 2011, exports outside the United  
            States of art-related goods, including, but not limited to,  
            movies, paintings, and jewelry, substantially increased and  
            resulted in a trade surplus within the arts industry.  The  
            national nonprofit arts industry annually generates billions  
            in economic activity and provides millions of jobs.


          5)The arts spark creativity and innovation in the workforce.   
            Creativity is recognized as one of the top five applied  
            employee skills sought by business leaders.  Nobel laureates  
            in the sciences are 17 times more likely to be actively  








                                                                     ACR 46  
                                                                     Page  3



            engaged in the arts than other scientists.


          6)The arts enhance our society.  A recent study demonstrated  
            that a high concentration of the arts in a city leads to  
            higher civic engagement, more social cohesion, higher child  
            welfare, and lower poverty rates.  A vibrant arts community  
            ensures that young people are not left to experience their  
            society through a pop culture and tabloid marketplace.


          7)The arts improve healthcare.  Nearly one-half of the nation's  
            healthcare institutions provide arts programming for patients,  
            families, and staff on the basis that art programs promote  
            healing in patients, resulting in shorter hospital stays,  
            better pain management, and less medication.


          8)The arts improve academic performance.  Students with an  
            education rich in the arts have higher grades and standardized  
            test scores and lower rates of dropping out of school.   
            Students with four years of arts or music in high school  
            average 100 more points on their SAT scores than students with  
            just one-half of a year of arts or music.  While art education  
            is mandated by state law, California is failing to provide a  
            sufficient arts education.  For the past 30 years arts  
            education in schools has been disappearing at an alarming  
            rate.  Between 1999 and 2004, student enrollment in music  
            education declined by almost half.  The state's recent fiscal  
            crisis has resulted in still more dramatic cuts to visual and  
            performing arts education programs for students throughout the  
            state.


          9)By increasing the state's investment in the arts through  
            funding the programs of the CAC in the 2015-16 Budget Act, the  
            Legislature and the Governor would strengthen the ability of  
            the CAC to invigorate the state and national economies,  
            including businesses of all sizes and the nonprofit sector,  
            foster creativity in the lives of people in their workplaces  
            and communities, secure a more solid cultural and educational  
            experience for our children, and cultivate healthy human  








                                                                     ACR 46  
                                                                     Page  4



            lives, both physically and emotionally.




          This resolution declares the importance of the arts to the state  
          and the essential role of the CAC in promoting the arts  
          throughout the state, and urges a unified effort between the  
          Legislature and the Governor to provide a substantial increase  
          in the General Fund appropriation to the CAC.  




          Prior/Related Legislation


          AB 1662 (Calderon, 2013-14) would have created an annual  
          continuous appropriation from the General Fund (GF) to the CAC  
          in an unspecified amount, and made various legislative findings  
          and declarations. AB 1662 was held in the Assembly  
          Appropriations Committee on Suspense.

          AB 580 (Nazarian, 2013-14) was substantially similar to AB 1662,  
          but contained an appropriation of $75 million dollars for CAC.  
          AB 580 was held in the Assembly Appropriations Committee on  
          Suspense.

          SB 1432 (Lieu), of 2013-14, also substantially similar to AB  
          1662, but with a $25 million dollar continuous appropriation for  
          CAC. SB 1432 was held in Senate Appropriations Committee.

          SB 571 (Price, Chapter 430, Statues of 2013) allowed taxpayers  
          to once again make voluntary contributions to the California  
          Arts Council Fund on their state personal income tax returns.

          SB 1076 (Price, Chapter 319, Statutes of 2010) allowed taxpayers  
          to make voluntary contributions to the California Arts Council  
          Fund on their state personal income tax returns. This act sunset  
          due to failure of the CAC to reach the statutory threshold of  
          $250,000 in tax donations.









                                                                     ACR 46  
                                                                     Page  5



          FISCAL EFFECT:   Appropriation:    No          Fiscal  
          Com.:NoLocal:    No


          SUPPORT:   (Verified7/13/15)


          Arts for LA
          Arts Orange County
          California Alliance for Arts Education
          California Arts Advocates
          California Association of Museums
          California Center for the Arts
          California State PTA
          Californians for the ARTS
          Theatre West


          OPPOSITION:   (Verified7/13/15)


          None received

          Prepared by: Jonas Austin / SFA / (916) 651-1520
          7/14/15 12:19:51
                                   ****  END  ****




















          

