                           BILL ANALYSIS                                                                                                                                                                                                    \x0c\xd3



                                                                    AB 1059


                                                                    Page  1





          Date of Hearing:  April 14, 2015


           ASSEMBLY COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL SAFETY AND TOXIC MATERIALS


                                  Luis Alejo, Chair


          AB 1059  
          (Eduardo Garcia) - As Introduced February 26, 2015


          SUBJECT:  California Communities Environmental Health Screening


          SUMMARY:  Requires the addition of border environmental health  
          data in the California Communities Environmental Health  
          Screening Tool (CalEnviroScreen 2.0) program.  Specifically,  
          this bill:  


          1)Requires the Office of Environmental Health and Hazard  
            Assessment (OEHHA) to update its CalEnviroScreen 2.0 tool by  
            using any relevant environmental data relating to known  
            impacts of air pollution, water pollution, and toxic sites on  
            the environmental quality of the communities in the  
            California-Mexico border region.



          2)Requires OEHHA to make a report to the Legislature at the  
            earlier of next update of the tool or by January 1, 2017 on  
            any barriers to accessing the data.
          EXISTING LAW:  


          1)Requires the investment plan related to the Greenhouse Gas  
            Reduction Fund (GHGR Fund) that is developed and submitted to  




\x0c



                                                                    AB 1059


                                                                    Page  2





            the Legislature to allocate: 





             a)   A minimum of 25% of the available moneys in the GHGR  
               Fund to projects that provide benefits to identified  
               disadvantaged communities; and, 
             b)   A minimum of 10% of the available moneys in the GHGR  
               Fund to projects located within identified disadvantaged  
               communities.  





          2)Requires the California Environmental Protection Agency  
            (CalEPA) to develop a methodology that identifies priority  
            community areas for investment opportunities related to the  
            GHGR Fund.  Requires that these "priority community investment  
            areas" be identified and updated at least every two years  
            based on specified geographic, socioeconomic, and  
            environmental hazard criteria. To meet this requirement OEHHA  
            has developed the CalEnviroScreen. 
          FISCAL EFFECT:  Not Known.


          COMMENTS: 


          Need for the bill:  According to the author, "The levels of air  
          pollution in the border region cannot be accurately assessed  
          without additional air quality monitoring in the area. This  
          current lack of reliable information may impact funding for  
          pollution reduction from carbon fees implemented in AB 32.







\x0c



                                                                    AB 1059


                                                                    Page  3







          Investing in priority community investments areas and most  
          impacted and disadvantaged communities:   In 2012, SB 535 (De  
          Leon), Chapter 830 required CalEPA to identify disadvantaged  
          communities for investment opportunities using the GHGR Fund.   
          Pursuant to this requirement, OEHHA has developed the  
          CalEnviroScreen that will use existing environmental, health,  
          and socioeconomic data to determine the extent to which  
          communities across the state are burdened by and vulnerable to  
          pollution.  Current law provides for the allocations for GHGR  
          Fund investments in projects within priority community  
          investment areas if certain investment levels related to those  
          communities are not met.  A minimum of 10 percent of revenues  
          deposited into the GHGR Fund is required to be allocated to fund  
          programs or projects that reduce GHG emissions or mitigate  
          direct health impacts of climate change in the "most impacted  
          and disadvantaged communities" in California.  





          According to OEHHA, CalEnviroScreen 2.0 is primarily designed to  
          assist CalEPA in carrying out its environmental justice mission  
          to conduct its activities in a manner that ensures the fair  
          treatment of all Californians, including minority and low-income  
          populations. The development of the tool was a step in the  
          implementation of the Agency\'s 2004 Environmental Justice Action  
          Plan, which called for the development of guidance to analyze  
          the impacts of multiple pollution sources in California  
          communities.



          Factors that contribute to a community\'s pollution burden or  
          vulnerability are often referred to as stressors. A community  
          impact assessment from multiple pollution sources and stressors  
          is complex and difficult to approach with traditional risk  




\x0c



                                                                    AB 1059


                                                                    Page  4





          assessment practices. Chemical-by-chemical, source-by-source,  
          route-by-route risk assessment approaches are not well suited to  
          the assessment of community-scale impacts, especially for  
          identifying the most impacted places across all of California.  
          Although traditional risk assessment may account for the  
          heightened sensitivities of some groups, such as children and  
          the elderly, it has not considered other community  
          characteristics that have been shown to affect vulnerability to  
          pollution, such as socioeconomic factors or underlying health  
          status. 



          CalEnviroScreen and border health concerns:  Areas of concerns  
          or gaps in the data used by CalEnviroScreen 2.0 that may need to  
          be addressed include how pollution originating in Mexico  
          contributes to the pollution burden in census tracts along the  
          California-Mexico border. Some of the specific areas of concern  
          include:


          
          1)Air monitoring data for ozone and PM2.5 from Mexico may be  
            needed to account for the air quality impacts on U.S. border  
            communities;
          2)Diesel particulate matter impacts from idling trucks at the  
            border crossings;
          3)Traffic density measurement from roads in Mexico in close  
            proximity to communities along the U.S.-Mexico border; and 
          4)Toxic releases and hazardous waste from Mexican facilities in  
            proximity to the U.S.-Mexico border and their potential for  
            adverse effects.

          The California State Assembly Committee on Environmental Safety  
          and Toxic Materials (ESTM) hearings on cross border river water  
          quality:  On March 19 and 20th, 2015, the ESTM Committee held a  
          two-part series of hearings in Southern California focusing on  
          California\'s role in managing binational river water quality  
          issues and on ensuring that border communities, especially  




\x0c



                                                                    AB 1059


                                                                    Page  5





          disadvantaged communities, are not left behind in water quality  
          restoration efforts.  The first hearing was held in Imperial  
          Beach and focused on the progress and challenges facing the  
          Tijuana River recovery strategy.  The second hearing was held in  
          Calexico and focused on the New River restoration efforts.  


          Dozens of community members, local elected officials, members of  
          international bodies and officials from the states of Baja  
          California and California attended the hearings.  Prioritization  
          of cross border water quality issues, dedicated funds for water  
          quality enhancement that can be used on both sides of the  
          border, and delineating an entity to coordinate and collaborate  
          on cross-border water quality issues were common themes of the  
          testimony presented at the New River hearing.  


          REGISTERED SUPPORT / OPPOSITION:




          Support


          Community Food and Justice Coalition
          Desert Protective Society 
          Environmental Justice Coalition for Water
          Greenaction for Health and Environmental Justice 
          La Union Hace la Fuerza
          Our Roots Multi-Cultural Center
          Our Roots Multi-Cultural Center
          Seeley Citizens United
          The Family Treehouse
          Tri-Valley CAREs (Communities Against a Radioactive Environment
          Valley Improvement Projects
          Valley Improvement Projects






\x0c



                                                                    AB 1059


                                                                    Page  6





          Opposition


          None on file.




          Analysis Prepared by:Bob Fredenburg / E.S. & T.M. / (916)  
          319-3965

































                                                       